post-merge updates: pow/mining (#7109)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/index.md

description: An explanation of how mining works in Ethereum and how it helps keep Ethereum secure and decentralized.
lang: en
sidebar: true
---

<InfoBanner emoji=":wave:">

>    Proof-of-work is no longer underlying Ethereum's consensus mechanism, meaning mining has been switched off. Instead, Ethereum is secured by validators who stake ETH. You can start staking your ETH today. Read more on <a href="/upgrades/merge/">The Merge</a>, <a href="/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/">proof-of-stake</a> and <a href="/staking/">staking</a>. This page is for historical interest!  

Reviewer: ```suggestion

   Proof-of-work is no longer underlying Ethereum's consensus mechanism, meaning mining has been switched off. Instead, Ethereum is secured by validators who stake ETH. You can start staking your ETH today. Read more on [The Merge](/upgrades/merge/), [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/), and [staking](/staking/). This page is for historical interest.
   
```

description: An explanation of how mining works in Ethereum and how it helps keep Ethereum secure and decentralized.
lang: en
sidebar: true
---

<InfoBanner emoji=":wave:">

>    Proof-of-work is no longer Ethereum's consensus mechanism, meaning mining has been switched off. Instead, Ethereum is secured by validators who stake ETH. You can start staking your ETH today. Read more on <a href="/upgrades/merge/">The Merge</a>, <a href="/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/">proof-of-stake</a> and <a href="/staking/">staking</a>. This page is for historical interest!  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Proof-of-work is no longer underlying Ethereum's consensus mechanism, meaning mining has been switched off. Instead, Ethereum is secured by validators who stake ETH. You can start staking your ETH today. Read more on <a href="/upgrades/merge/">The Merge</a>, <a href="/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/">proof-of-stake</a> and <a href="/staking/">staking</a>. This page is for historical interest!  
```

</InfoBanner>

>  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

 
## Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

To better understand this page, we recommend you first read up on [transactions](/developers/docs/transactions/), [blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/) and [proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/).

## What is Ethereum mining? {#what-is-ethereum-mining}

Mining is the process of creating a block of transactions to be added to the Ethereum blockchain in Ethereum's now-deprecated proof-of-work architecture.

> The word mining originates in the context of the gold analogy for crypto currencies. Gold or precious metals are scarce, so are digital tokens, and the only way to increase the total volume in a proof-of-work system is through mining. In proof-of-work Ethereum, the only mode of issuance was via mining. Unlike gold or precious metals however, Ethereum mining was also the way to secure the network by creating, verifying, publishing and propagating blocks in the blockchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The word mining originates in the context of the gold analogy for cryptocurrencies. Gold or precious metals are scarce, so are digital tokens, and the only way to increase the total volume in a proof-of-work system is through mining. In proof-of-work Ethereum, the only mode of issuance was via mining. Unlike gold or precious metals however, Ethereum mining was also the way to secure the network by creating, verifying, publishing and propagating blocks in the blockchain.
```

Just a note here that it's not just miners who secure the network by "verifying" and "propagating" blocks, as all nodes contribute to this.

Mining ether = Securing the Network

> Mining is the lifeblood of proof-of-work. Ethereum miners - computers running software - used their time and computation power to process transactions and produce blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mining is the lifeblood of any proof-of-work blockchain. Ethereum miners - computers running software - used their time and computation power to process transactions and produce blocks prior to the transition to proof-of-stake.
```

## Why do miners exist? {#why-do-miners-exist}

In decentralized systems like Ethereum, we need to ensure that everyone agrees on the order of transactions. Miners helped this happen by solving computationally difficult puzzles to produce blocks, securing the network from attacks.

[More on proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/)

> Anyone could mine on the Ethereum network using their computer. However, not everyone could mine ether (ETH) profitably. In most cases, miners had to purchase dedicated computer hardware. The average computer was unlikely to earn enough block rewards to cover the associated costs of mining.

Reviewer 2: Just a suggestion.. "could" sounds more like a theoretical present tense. 
```suggestion
Anyone was previously able to mine on the Ethereum network using their computer. However, not everyone could mine ether (ETH) profitably. In most cases, miners had to purchase dedicated computer hardware, and have access to inexpensive energy sources. The average computer was unlikely to earn enough block rewards to cover the associated costs of mining.
```

### Cost of mining {#cost-of-mining}

- Potential costs of the hardware necessary to build and maintain a mining rig
- Electrical cost of powering the mining rig

> - If you were mining in a pool, mining pools typically charge a flat % fee of each block generated by the pool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If you were mining in a pool, these pools typically charged a flat % fee of each block generated by the pool
```

> description: An explanation of how mining works in Ethereum and how it helps keep Ethereum secure and decentralized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: An explanation of how mining worked on Ethereum.
```

lang: en
sidebar: true
---

<InfoBanner emoji=":wave:">

>    Proof-of-work is no longer underlying Ethereum's consensus mechanism, meaning mining has been switched off. Instead, Ethereum is secured by validators who stake ETH. You can start staking your ETH today. Read more on [The Merge](/upgrades/merge/), [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/), and [staking](/staking/). This page is for historical interest.

Reviewer: Added spaces either side so we can use markdown syntax instead of HTML here.

## The mining algorithm {#mining-algorithm}

> Ethereum Mainnet onyl ever used one mining algorithm - ['Ethash'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/ethash). This was a successor to an original R&D algorithm known as ['Dagger-Hashamoto'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/dagger-hashamoto).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ethereum Mainnet only ever used one mining algorithm - ['Ethash'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/ethash). This was a successor to an original R&D algorithm known as ['Dagger-Hashamoto'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/dagger-hashamoto).
```

> The algorithm is based around the provision of a large, transient, randomly generated dataset which forms a [Directed Acyclic Graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) (the Dagger-part), with miners attempting to solve a particular constraint on it, partly determined through a block’s header-hash. This has high memory-access bandwidth requirements but could be run using a modest processor, making it GPU-friendly but resistant to the type of ASIC-driven hardware arms race that could pose a centralization risk (more on [problems with ASICS](https://www.investopedia.com/investing/why-centralized-crypto-mining-growing-problem/)). ASICs for Ethereum mining were eventually developed, but the majority of mining on Ethereum was nevertheless done using GPUs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The algorithm is based around the provision of a large, transient, randomly generated dataset which forms a [Directed Acyclic Graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) (the Dagger part), with miners attempting to solve a particular constraint on it, partly determined through a block’s header-hash. This has high memory-access bandwidth requirements but could be run using a modest processor, making it GPU-friendly but resistant to the type of ASIC-driven hardware arms race that could pose a centralization risk (more on [problems with ASICS](https://www.investopedia.com/investing/why-centralized-crypto-mining-growing-problem/)). ASICs for Ethereum mining were eventually developed, but the majority of mining on Ethereum was nevertheless done using GPUs.
```

## The mining algorithm {#mining-algorithm}

Ethereum Mainnet only ever used one mining algorithm - ['Ethash'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/ethash). This was a successor to an original R&D algorithm known as ['Dagger-Hashamoto'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/dagger-hashamoto).

> 
> More information on these mining algorithms is available at our [mining algorithms page](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining-algorithms/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

[More on mining algorithms](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining-algorithms/).
```

## The mining algorithm {#mining-algorithm}

Ethereum Mainnet only ever used one mining algorithm - ['Ethash'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/ethash). This was a successor to an original R&D algorithm known as ['Dagger-Hashamoto'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/dagger-hashamoto).

> The algorithm is based around the provision of a large, transient, randomly generated dataset which forms a [Directed Acyclic Graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) (the Dagger part), with miners attempting to solve a particular constraint on it, partly determined through a block’s header-hash. This has high memory-access bandwidth requirements but could be run using a modest processor, making it GPU-friendly but resistant to the type of ASIC-driven hardware arms race that could pose a centralization risk (more on [problems with ASICS](https://www.investopedia.com/investing/why-centralized-crypto-mining-growing-problem/)). ASICs for Ethereum mining were eventually developed, but the majority of mining on Ethereum was nevertheless done using GPUs.

Reviewer: Can we just remove this section @jmcook1186? 

The only nice thing I'd like to keep **somewhere** is the problem with ASICS information, though if it doesn't already, I think that can be covered in the mining algorithms page.

Reviewer: Coming back to this, I feel the same way. I've removed it and [created a card to add it to the mining algorithms page.](https://www.notion.so/efdn/Add-information-about-the-problem-with-ASICS-to-mining-algorithms-page-45985053907a4a50a2049e941c9c5cba)

> 
> The algorithm is based around the provision of a large, transient, randomly generated dataset which forms a [Directed Acyclic Graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) (the Dagger part), with miners attempting to solve a particular constraint on it, partly determined through a block’s header-hash. This has high memory-access bandwidth requirements but could be run using a modest processor, making it GPU-friendly but resistant to the type of ASIC-driven hardware arms race that could pose a centralization risk (more on [problems with ASICS](https://www.investopedia.com/investing/why-centralized-crypto-mining-growing-problem/)). ASICs for Ethereum mining were eventually developed, but the majority of mining on Ethereum was nevertheless done using GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## The mining algorithm {#mining-algorithm}

> Ethereum Mainnet only ever used one mining algorithm - ['Ethash'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/ethash). This was a successor to an original R&D algorithm known as ['Dagger-Hashamoto'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/dagger-hashamoto).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethereum Mainnet only ever used one mining algorithm - ['Ethash'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/ethash). Ethhash was the successor to an original R&D algorithm known as ['Dagger-Hashamoto'](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/mining-algorithms/dagger-hashamoto).
```
